examples/Cluster-Example.md, before:

## Running Delex on a Cluster of Machines

Here we give an example of running Delex on a cluster of machines. We assume you have already installed Delex on a cluster of machines, using [this guide](https://github.com/anhaidgroup/delex/blob/main/doc/installation-guides/install-cloud-based-cluster.md).

### Step 1: Downloading the Datasets

To begin, we need to download three datasets from GitHub. Navigate to the dblp*acm folder [here](https://github.com/anhaidgroup/delex/tree/main/examples/data/dblp_acm). Click on 'gold.parquet' and click the download icon at the top. Repeat this for 'table_a.parquet' and 'table_b.parquet'. Now move all these into a directory called 'dblp_acm' on each node in the cluster. \_This should be done for all the nodes in the cluster.*

### Step 2: Creating a Python File

On the master node, in the 'dblp_acm' directory, create a file called 'example.py'. We will add code to this Python file as we walk through this document.

### Step 3: Importing Dependencies

Now we can open up the 'example.py' file, and add code to import all of the necessary packages that we will use.

```
from pathlib import Path

import sys
sys.path.append(str(Path().resolve().parent))
import os
os.environ['PYTHONPATH'] = str(Path().resolve().parent)

from pyspark import SparkConf
from pyspark.sql import SparkSession
import pyspark.sql.functions as F


from delex.lang.predicate import (
        BM25TopkPredicate,
        JaccardPredicate,
        EditDistancePredicate,
        SmithWatermanPredicate,
        JaroPredicate,
        JaroWinklerPredicate,
        CosinePredicate,
        ExactMatchPredicate
)

from delex.lang import BlockingProgram, DropRule, KeepRule
from delex.tokenizer import StrippedWhiteSpaceTokenizer, QGramTokenizer
from delex.execution.plan_executor import PlanExecutor
from delex.utils.checks import check_tables
import operator
import psutil
```

### Step 4: Initializing Spark

Next we initialize Spark. For this example we are doing everything in a cloud setup. All files need to be stored in the ~/dblp_acm directory on all nodes.

```
# enable pyarrow execution, recommended for better performance
conf = SparkConf()\
        .set('spark.sql.execution.arrow.pyspark.enabled',  'true')

# initialize a local spark context
spark = SparkSession.builder\
                    .master('{url of spark master}')\
                    .config(conf=conf)\
                    .appName('Basic Example')\
                    .getOrCreate()
```

#### Data

The data we downloaded earlier contains files in parquet format. This is a small dataset of paper citations with about 1000 rows per table. In what follows we load in the paths to the data files and check that the data fits the expected Delex format.

```
# path to the test data directory
data_path = Path('/home/ubuntu/dblp_acm')

# table to be indexed, generally this should be the table with fewer rows
index_table_path = data_path / 'table_a.parquet'
# table for searching
search_table_path = data_path / 'table_b.parquet'
# the ground truth, i.e. the correct matching pairs
gold_path = data_path / 'gold.parquet'

# check that the tables fit the expected format
check_tables(index_table, '_id', search_table, '_id',)
```

### Step 5: Reading the Data

Once Spark has been initialized, we can read all of our data into Spark dataframes.

```
# read all the data as spark dataframes
index_table = spark.read.parquet(f'file://{str(index_table_path)}')
search_table = spark.read.parquet(f'file://{str(search_table_path)}')
gold = spark.read.parquet(f'file://{str(gold_path)}')

index_table.printSchema()
```

### Step 6: Creating a Blocking Program

Next, we define our blocking program. For this basic example, we will define a very simple blocking program that returns all pairs where the Jaccard scores using a 3gram tokenizer are greater than or equal to .6. To do this we define a BlockingProgram with a single KeepRule which has a single JaccardPredicate.

```
prog = BlockingProgram(
        keep_rules = [
                KeepRule([ JaccardPredicate('title', 'title', QGramTokenizer(3), operator.ge, .6)])
            ],
        drop_rules = [],
    )
```

In terms of SQL this program is equivalent to

```
SELECT A.id, B.id
FROM index_table as A, search_table as B
WHERE jaccard_3gram(A.title, B.title) >= .6
```

### Step 7: Executing the Blocking Program

Next, we create a PlanExecutor and execute the BlockingProgram by calling .execute(). Note that we passed optimize=False and estimate_cost=False as arguments. These parameters control the plan that is generated, which will be explained in a separate example.

```
executor = PlanExecutor(
        index_table=index_table,
        search_table=search_table,
        optimize=False,
        estimate_cost=False,
)

candidates, stats = executor.execute(prog, search_table_id_col='_id', projection=['_id'])
candidates = candidates.persist()
candidates.show()
```

### Step 8: Computing Recall

Finally, we can compute recall. As you can see, the output of the PlanExecutor is actually grouped by the id of search_table. This is done for space and computation efficiency reasons. To compute recall we first need to 'unroll' the output and then do a set intersection with the gold pairs to get the number of true positives.

```
# unroll the output
pairs = candidates.select(
                    F.explode('id1_list').alias('a_id'),
                    F.col('id2').alias('b_id')
                )
# total number
n_pairs = pairs.count()
true_positives = gold.intersect(pairs).count()
recall = true_positives / gold.count()
print(f'n_pairs : {n_pairs}')
print(f'true_positives : {true_positives}')
print(f'recall : {recall}')

# remove the dataframe from the cache
candidates.unpersist()
```

### Step 9: Running on a Cluster

In order to run the above Python program on a cluster, we can use the following command from the root directory (you can always get to the root directory by typing `cd` into the terminal).

```
spark/bin/spark-submit \
  --master {url of Spark Master} \
  /home/ubuntu/dblp_acm/example.py
```

Commit message:

fix check tables comments, add try exception blogs

examples/Cluster-Example.md, after:

## Running Delex on a Cluster of Machines

Here we give an example of running Delex on a cluster of machines. We assume you have already installed Delex on a cluster of machines, using [this guide](https://github.com/anhaidgroup/delex/blob/main/doc/installation-guides/install-cloud-based-cluster.md).

### Step 1: Downloading the Datasets

To begin, we need to download three datasets from GitHub. Navigate to the dblp*acm folder [here](https://github.com/anhaidgroup/delex/tree/main/examples/data/dblp_acm). Click on 'gold.parquet' and click the download icon at the top. Repeat this for 'table_a.parquet' and 'table_b.parquet'. Now move all these into a directory called 'dblp_acm' on each node in the cluster. \_This should be done for all the nodes in the cluster.*

### Step 2: Creating a Python File

On the master node, in the 'dblp_acm' directory, create a file called 'example.py'. We will add code to this Python file as we walk through this document.

### Step 3: Importing Dependencies

Now we can open up the 'example.py' file, and add code to import all of the necessary packages that we will use.

```
from pathlib import Path

import sys
sys.path.append(str(Path().resolve().parent))
import os
os.environ['PYTHONPATH'] = str(Path().resolve().parent)

from pyspark import SparkConf
from pyspark.sql import SparkSession
import pyspark.sql.functions as F


from delex.lang.predicate import (
        BM25TopkPredicate,
        JaccardPredicate,
        EditDistancePredicate,
        SmithWatermanPredicate,
        JaroPredicate,
        JaroWinklerPredicate,
        CosinePredicate,
        ExactMatchPredicate
)

from delex.lang import BlockingProgram, DropRule, KeepRule
from delex.tokenizer import StrippedWhiteSpaceTokenizer, QGramTokenizer
from delex.execution.plan_executor import PlanExecutor
from delex.utils.checks import check_tables
import operator
import psutil
```

### Step 4: Initializing Spark

Next we initialize Spark. For this example we are doing everything in a cloud setup. All files need to be stored in the ~/dblp_acm directory on all nodes.

```
# enable pyarrow execution, recommended for better performance
conf = SparkConf()\
        .set('spark.sql.execution.arrow.pyspark.enabled',  'true')

# initialize a local spark context
spark = SparkSession.builder\
                    .master('{url of spark master}')\
                    .config(conf=conf)\
                    .appName('Basic Example')\
                    .getOrCreate()
```

#### Data

The data we downloaded earlier contains files in parquet format. This is a small dataset of paper citations with about 1000 rows per table. In what follows we load in the paths to the data files and check that the data fits the expected Delex format.

```
# path to the test data directory
data_path = Path('/home/ubuntu/dblp_acm')

# table to be indexed, generally this should be the table with fewer rows
index_table_path = data_path / 'table_a.parquet'
# table for searching
search_table_path = data_path / 'table_b.parquet'
# the ground truth, i.e. the correct matching pairs
gold_path = data_path / 'gold.parquet'

# Validate that table_a and table_b have valid id columns with non-null and unique values
# This check should be run before any other Sparkly operations.
try:
    check_tables(table_a, '_id', table_b, '_id')
except Exception as e:
    print(f"Error: {e}")
    exit(1)
```

### Step 5: Reading the Data

Once Spark has been initialized, we can read all of our data into Spark dataframes.

```
# read all the data as spark dataframes
index_table = spark.read.parquet(f'file://{str(index_table_path)}')
search_table = spark.read.parquet(f'file://{str(search_table_path)}')
gold = spark.read.parquet(f'file://{str(gold_path)}')

index_table.printSchema()
```

### Step 6: Creating a Blocking Program

Next, we define our blocking program. For this basic example, we will define a very simple blocking program that returns all pairs where the Jaccard scores using a 3gram tokenizer are greater than or equal to .6. To do this we define a BlockingProgram with a single KeepRule which has a single JaccardPredicate.

```
prog = BlockingProgram(
        keep_rules = [
                KeepRule([ JaccardPredicate('title', 'title', QGramTokenizer(3), operator.ge, .6)])
            ],
        drop_rules = [],
    )
```

In terms of SQL this program is equivalent to

```
SELECT A.id, B.id
FROM index_table as A, search_table as B
WHERE jaccard_3gram(A.title, B.title) >= .6
```

### Step 7: Executing the Blocking Program

Next, we create a PlanExecutor and execute the BlockingProgram by calling .execute(). Note that we passed optimize=False and estimate_cost=False as arguments. These parameters control the plan that is generated, which will be explained in a separate example.

```
executor = PlanExecutor(
        index_table=index_table,
        search_table=search_table,
        optimize=False,
        estimate_cost=False,
)

candidates, stats = executor.execute(prog, search_table_id_col='_id', projection=['_id'])
candidates = candidates.persist()
candidates.show()
```

### Step 8: Computing Recall

Finally, we can compute recall. As you can see, the output of the PlanExecutor is actually grouped by the id of search_table. This is done for space and computation efficiency reasons. To compute recall we first need to 'unroll' the output and then do a set intersection with the gold pairs to get the number of true positives.

```
# unroll the output
pairs = candidates.select(
                    F.explode('id1_list').alias('a_id'),
                    F.col('id2').alias('b_id')
                )
# total number
n_pairs = pairs.count()
true_positives = gold.intersect(pairs).count()
recall = true_positives / gold.count()
print(f'n_pairs : {n_pairs}')
print(f'true_positives : {true_positives}')
print(f'recall : {recall}')

# remove the dataframe from the cache
candidates.unpersist()
```

### Step 9: Running on a Cluster

In order to run the above Python program on a cluster, we can use the following command from the root directory (you can always get to the root directory by typing `cd` into the terminal).

```
spark/bin/spark-submit \
  --master {url of Spark Master} \
  /home/ubuntu/dblp_acm/example.py
```
